>> Can an ancient psychedelic
plant medicine change
one's DNA?
A groundbreaking
new study strongly
suggests so, in this second
part of our Gaia News
Special Investigation.
This is Gaia News.
[THEME MUSIC]
In part one of
this investigation,
we told you about the compelling
findings of a recent study
on the use of ayahuasca
in traditional ceremonies.
Carlos Tanner is the director
of the Ayahuasca Foundation
in Peru where the
study took place.
>> What really
struck me, I think,
was the depression
that after the retreat,
there was a significant decrease
in the symptoms of depression.
But more importantly,
six months later,
there was a continuation
of decrease in the symptoms
where there was no treatment.
And so that really
suggested that there
was a true transformation,
that people had made
not just an improvement
because of the treatment,
but had made an improvement
that would last.
>> Another finding made
researchers particularly
excited.
Dr. Simon Ruffel is a
psychiatrist who led the study.
>> Most interesting in this
study was the fact that we were
looking at epigenetic changes.
So this is the study of looking
at how the environment causes
changes to gene expression.
In order to assess this,
we collected saliva samples
from participants immediately
before drinking ayahuasca
and immediately
after that retreat.
And this was the
first study that's
ever looked at
epigenetic changes
in any psychedelic
including ayahuasca.
>> Researchers found a
statistically significant
change in the expression
of the SIGMAR1 gene,
which is thought to be involved
with how traumatic memories are
recalled.
>> We can't draw solid
conclusions from this
because the sample group
was relatively small.
But it does suggest
that we should
be looking more at
epigenetic changes
as a result of ayahuasca, and
it's exciting nonetheless.
I'm pleased to say that we
have got more funding that's
going to allow us to continue
to look at this in the future.
>> What makes these
findings so important?
>> This is potentially
significant because instead
of just changing the way that
we're thinking about things,
it could be altering the way
that our DNA is expressed,
and having a real change on a
biological level rather than
just on a psychological level.
>> What I feel happens in terms
of that transformation that I
often use as a description of
people's experiences is that
their truths are changed.
But ayahuasca, through
that expanded awareness,
allows us to change or transform
truths, especially the ones
that are detrimental to us.
And when you change
a truth, there
is a biological and
physiological transformation
that goes along with it
or is directed by it.
And so to me, if I were to
look at the epigenetic results
of the study, I would
look at the transformation
of personal truth
first, and then
the genetic expression
changing as a result
of the consciousness shift.
>> Just how ayahuasca brings
about this profound shift has
been the focus of
study for decades.
There are many
proposed explanations,
from the biochemical
to the mystical.
>> What is really
unique to ayahuasca,
although also present in
other psychedelic medicines,
is its ability to amplify
sensory perceptive ability.
So instead of the normal
limitations of our biology,
which we can easily reference
by the term visible spectrum,
which refers to only the light
spectrum that we can see,
ayahuasca expands those
spectrums of sensory perception
to allow for a
greater awareness.
So essentially, we
have an expansion
of awareness and access to a
greater source of information
that we can then process to
gain more insights into what's
going on inside of ourselves,
as well as outside of ourselves,
to make more accurate
decisions about how to proceed
towards our well-being.
>> Those involved with the use
of ayahuasca in traditional
settings stressed the importance
of the deeply-rooted tradition
of the medicine.
>> One of the most important
things to remember in this
study is that ayahuasca is not
the substance that makes this
happen, not the way that we look
at antidepressant medication
or a pharmaceutical product in
the way that those are tested.
What is being tested in
this study is the tradition.
It's the ideology and
methodology, the ceremony.
And yes, the ingestion of
ayahuasca is a part of that,
but it is the entire
process that was
able to produce those results.
>> Given that other psychedelics
like psilocybin and MDMA are
now at the forefront
of clinical study,
could ayahuasca one day also
be studied in a lab setting?
>> Where does ayahuasca
fit into this?
And this is a
difficult question.
Ayahuasca is quite complex.
Can it be used in a lab setting?
Can it be used in
a hospital setting?
When you lose
things, if you're not
using it in a
shamanic tradition,
these are questions that
we're trying to answer.
We're beginning to look
at ayahuasca more and lab
settings, and also trying
to use some influences
of indigenous knowledge.
I don't know whether
or not ayahuasca
is going to be used in
mainstream Western medicine,
perhaps it will be used
more in independent
in private practices,
almost like the way
that acupuncture is.
Only time will tell.
But either way, it's
exciting and it's
an exciting time for
ayahuasca and the potential
that it holds.
>> Whether or not ayahuasca
could or should be studied
in a clinical setting will
continue to be debated.
But given just how healing
this medicine has proven to be,
all in the field agree that
further research is necessary
and could reveal
a deep connection
to our own essential nature.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.